Overview
On this problem set, you will build a networked multiplayer version of Memory, a.k.a. Concentration, the game in which you turn over face-down cards and try to find matching pairs. Our version will have players turning over cards simultaneously, rather than taking turns. We’ll call it Memory Scramble.

Problem 1: you will design and implement one or more ADTs for this game.

Problem 2: you will connect your ADTs to a game server that handles clients using HTTP.

When you’re done with problems 1-2, you can play Memory Scramble in your browser.

Problem 3: you will revise your system to handle multiple simultaneous players using an asynchronous game board.

Problem 4: you will design and implement a map-like function (as in map/filter/reduce) that replaces cards on the board.

Problem 5: you will design and implement watching for changes to the board, which makes the Memory Scramble user interface more responsive.

Iterative Development Recommendation

Both automatic and manual grading for the alpha will focus more on your board and server without concurrency.

First, do problems 1 & 2 without considering concurrency: make your Board or other ADTs use synchronous methods, and don’t worry about multiple concurrent players in your server. Implement the gameplay rules specified below by writing tests, choosing data structures, and writing code. Consider the abstraction functions and rep invariants of all your data types.

Then, revise your work in problem 3 to make your system ready for concurrent players. Revise your choice of ADT operations based on the need for asynchronous operations.

Finally, go on to problems 4 and 5.

Game board · Gameplay rules · Example game transcript · Playing on the web

Game board
The Memory Scramble game board has a grid of spaces. Each space starts with a card. As cards are matched and removed, spaces become empty.

A card in our game is a non-empty string of non-whitespace non-newline characters. This allows “pictures” like Hello and pictures like 🌈 by using emoji characters. For example:

Two cards match if they have the same string of characters.

All cards start face down. Players will turn them face up, and the cards will either turn face down again (if the player turned over cards that don’t match) or be removed from the board (if they do match).

Game boards are loaded from a file. Here is the formal grammar for board files:

BOARD_FILE ::= ROW "x" COLUMN NEWLINE (CARD NEWLINE)+

CARD ::= [^\s\n\r]+
ROW ::= INT
COLUMN ::= INT
INT ::= [0-9]+
NEWLINE ::= "\r"? "\n"
In BOARD_FILE, ROW is the number of rows, COLUMN is the number of columns, and the cards are listed reading across each row, starting with the top row.

For example, this board of rainbows and unicorns: 

… would be specified in a file as:

3x3↵
🦄↵
🦄↵
🌈↵
🌈↵
🌈↵
🦄↵
🌈↵
🦄↵
🌈↵
In this example, ↵ is used to show newlines. This board is provided in the boards folder of the problem set as perfect.txt.

A valid board file must have exactly ROW×COLUMN newline-terminated CARD lines.

Gameplay rules
Multiple players manipulate the cards on the board concurrently. They play the game by trying to turn over pairs of identical cards.

Here’s an informal summary of the rules:

1
When a player turns over a first card in a pair, they control that card; but if someone else already controls it, the player waits until they can take control.
2
When the player turns over a second card, if the cards match, the player keeps control of them; otherwise, the player gives up control. The cards stay face up for now.
3
When the player makes their next move, if their previous cards matched, those cards are removed from the board; otherwise, if no one controls them, they turn face down.
Notice at least two differences from usual Memory game rules: you can “turn over” a card that is already face up, waiting until that card is available; and turned-over cards stay face up on the board until the player who turned them over makes another move.

Complete rules
First card: a player tries to turn over a first card by identifying a space on the board…

1-A
If there is no card there (the player identified an empty space, perhaps because the card was just removed by another player), the operation fails.
1-B
If the card is face down, it turns face up (all players can now see it) and the player controls that card.
1-C
If the card is already face up, but not controlled by another player, then it remains face up, and the player controls the card.
1-D
And if the card is face up and controlled by another player, the operation waits. The player will contend with other players to take control of the card at the next opportunity.
Second card: once a player controls their first card, they can try to turn over a second card…

2-A
If there is no card there, the operation fails. The player also relinquishes control of their first card (but it remains face up for now).
2-B
If the card is face up and controlled by a player (another player or themselves), the operation fails. To avoid deadlocks, the operation does not wait. The player also relinquishes control of their first card (but it remains face up for now).
—
If the card is face down, or if the card is face up but not controlled by a player, then:
2-C
If it is face down, it turns face up.
2-D
If the two cards are the same, that’s a successful match! The player keeps control of both cards (and they remain face up on the board for now).
2-E
If they are not the same, the player relinquishes control of both cards (again, they remain face up for now).
While one player is waiting to turn over a first card, other players continue to play normally. They do not wait, unless they also try to turn over a first card controlled by another player.

Failure in 1-A, 2-A, and 2-B means that the player fails to control a card (and in 2-A/B, also relinquishes control). The player can still continue to play the game.

After trying to turn over a second card, successfully or not, the player will try again to turn over a first card. When they do that, before following the rules above, they finish their previous play:

3-A
If they had turned over a matching pair, they control both cards. Now, those cards are removed from the board, and they relinquish control of them. Score-keeping is not specified as part of the game.
3-B
Otherwise, they had turned over one or two non-matching cards, and relinquished control but left them face up on the board. Now, for each of those card(s), if the card is still on the board, currently face up, and currently not controlled by another player, the card is turned face down.
If the player never tries to turn over a new first card, then the steps of 3-A/B never occur.

Example game transcript
We start with a 3×3 grid of face-down cards and 3 players: Alice, Bob, and Charlie.


Hover or tap on the board to show tooltips. →	
Alice turns over the top left card. She controls that card for the moment (rule 1-B).

Bob and Charlie also try to turn over that card at the same time.

Both are now waiting for the chance to control it (1-D).

Alice turns over the bottom right card (2-C). It doesn’t match.

Alice no longer controls any cards, but they stay face up for now (2-E).

Either Bob or Charlie will now get to control the top left card.

Bob becomes the controller of that red heart card (1-C).

Alice hasn’t made another move, so the purple heart is still face up.

Charlie is still waiting.

Alice goes ahead and turns over a new first card, a yellow heart at the center of the board.

The red heart is controlled by Bob, so it stays face up (3-B).

But the purple heart isn’t controlled, so it turns face down (same 3-B).

While Alice is thinking about her second card, Bob turns over the top right card.

His first and second cards are a match!

Bob keeps control of the cards for now (2-D). Charlie is still waiting.

Bob turns over a new first card, a green heart on the left side.

His matched red hearts are removed from the board, and he relinquishes control of them (3-A).

Charlie finally gets a chance at the top left card — but it’s gone (1-A).

Charlie is now ready to turn over a new first card.

Alice and Bob each control one card and will try to turn over a matching second.

Playing on the web
To support multiplayer Memory Scramble games over the network, we define a HTTP protocol so the game can be played in a web browser. Code for the web server is already provided (in server.ts), but it relies on these provided function specifications in the code for this problem set, which you will have to implement:

parseFromFile() from board.ts
look(),flip(),map(), and watch() from commands.ts
In the protocol, each player identifies themselves by an ID, a nonempty string of alphanumeric or underscore characters of their choice. All requests with the same player ID are the actions of a single player.

For all requests, the server responds with a board state, showing the current state of the board from the player’s perspective. A board state is described by the following grammar:

BOARD_STATE ::= ROW "x" COLUMN NEWLINE (SPOT NEWLINE)+

SPOT ::= "none" | "down" | "up " CARD | "my " CARD
CARD ::= [^\s\n\r]+
ROW ::= INT
COLUMN ::= INT
INT ::= [0-9]+
NEWLINE ::= "\r"? "\n"
In the board state, ROW is the number of rows, COLUMN is the number of columns, and the cards are listed reading across each row, starting with the top row.

none indicates no card in that location, down is a face-down card, up is a face-up card controlled by another player (or by no one), and my is a face-up card controlled by the player who sent the request.

For example:

3x3↵
up␣A↵
down↵
down↵
none↵
my␣B↵
none↵
down↵
down↵
up␣C↵
In this example ␣ is used to show blank spaces and ↵ to show newlines.

There are no cards at (1,0) or (1,2).

The cards at (0,0), (1,1) and (2,2) are face up, and the player receiving this message controls the B card at (1,1).

Problem 1: Game board
Specify, test, and implement a mutable Board ADT to represent the Memory Scramble game board. It may be useful to define other ADTs as well.

Remember to include: a specification for every class and every method you write; abstraction functions, rep invariants, and safety from rep exposure arguments; checkRep() and toString().

Board defines a static factory method for creating new boards that you must support:

parseFromFile(filename): creates a board by parsing a file in the format described above
For parsing board files, a parser generator (like ParserLib) is more complexity than you need.

String.split() and String.match() probably can handle all the parsing and extracting.

fs.promises.readFile() reads a file asynchronously. Be sure to use the promise-based version of this function (called fsPromises.readFile in the documentation, and referenced as fs.promises.readFile if you import fs), rather than the older callback-function-based version (also called readFile but found in fs itself).

To keep track of players and their state:

Each player might simply be identified by their ID used in the command functions. All of the game state would be stored in the Board.

Each player might be represented using an ADT, e.g. Player. Some of the player’s state might be stored in the Player object, or the Board might store all the state.

You will need to track who controls which cards and the status of each card according to the gameplay rules.

Iterative development recommendation: implement a synchronous board first (i.e. with no async methods other than parseFromFile), and connect it to a server in Problem 2. The alpha grading will focus more on playing the game without concurrency. Then revise for correct behavior with concurrent players in Problem 3.

To implement waiting according to the gameplay rules, use asynchronous methods and await, or callback functions. The board should not busy-wait.

You decide which actions are atomic, since the rules do not specify. In rule 3-B, for example, turning the two cards back over might be a single action — where no other player can see or manipulate the intermediate board — or two separate actions. But the board must never reach an inconsistent state, such as two players controlling the same card, or having a face-down card that a player still controls.

Note that a flip operation can fail at several places in the rules. In the spec of the flip() command (which you will need to implement to connect your Board to the provided web server), failure is indicated by a rejected promise, which can be done by throwing an exception from an async function. Keep this in mind when you are designing your own Board operations. For testing for a rejected promise, assert.rejects is useful.

Simulating a game
In simulation.ts we have provided skeleton code for a program that simulates one player interacting with a board, randomly flipping over several cards.

You should be able to fill in the blanks in simulationMain() function and use npm run simulation to run simulated single-player Memory Scramble games.

Problem 2: Connect to the web server
In order to connect your Board type to the provided web server, and also to the Didit autograder, you need to implement the functions in commands.ts so that they use operations of Board. Start with these two functions, which are sufficient to play the game:

look() from commands.ts
flip() from commands.ts
At this point, your look() and flip() may not yet implement correct waiting behavior according to the rules or be able to handle concurrent players, but they should be able to handle multiple clients that make moves in sequence.

In general, keep all the functions in commands.ts extremely simple. They should be no more than glue code, calling at most a couple of your Board operations, without any additional logic. Specifically:

The body of each function should be at most 3 lines long, consisting of at most a couple simple function calls, possibly using local variables, plus a return statement.
All of the functions that they call should be already well-tested, either by your Board test suite or by TypeScript itself.
If that’s the case, you don’t need to write a separate test suite for commands.ts. Your existing tests for Board should suffice.

If any function in commands.ts is more complex than that — for example, with control statements like if or while, or string-processing operations — then you will need to create test/commands.test.ts and design a test suite for it. Before you do that, stop! First discuss your design with course staff, because this is a sign that the operations you chose for your Board type are not powerful enough.

Spec. The specs for look() and flip() are given, but you may strengthen them if you want.
Test. Keep these operations extremely simple so you don’t have to test them separately.
Code. Implement look() and flip() as simply as possible.
Running the web server
To start the server, use npm start, which runs main() in server.ts. This code parses command-line arguments, calls the Board parsing function based on those arguments, and creates and starts a server. You should not need to change server.ts.

To run main(), first open a terminal, either inside Visual Studio Code or in a separate terminal window. Then start a web server on port 8080 with our 3×3 board of rainbows and unicorns:

npm start 8080 boards/perfect.txt
Remember that the server keeps running until you terminate its process, and if you try to run a second server on the same port, it will fail with “address already in use”. If you run the server on the command line, use Ctrl-C in that terminal to stop it.

Once your server is complete, you can play the game in your web browser!

In your web browser, go to the URL that the server displays when it starts, and it will return a web page that speaks the game protocol with your server.

You can open the URL in multiple tabs to pretend to be different players. Each time you open the page, it randomly generates a new player ID to use with your server.

You can also connect to a friend’s server by IP address, but you may not be able to do it directly as a URL in your browser (because your browser may require connecting by HTTPS, which this server does not support). Instead, find the web page as a file in your own ps4 code (its name is public/index.html), open that HTML file in your web browser, and specify the other server by IP address.

Problem 3: Revise for concurrent players
Revise Board to make it asynchronous, updating other ADTs as needed.

Consider using await on a promise returned by the board to implement waiting for a card according to the rules. Refer to “making and keeping a promise” in Mutual Exclusion for discussion of:

the Promise.withResolvers() factory function, which is most useful for transforming callbacks into promises
the specification and implementation of Deferred, which is most useful for storing promises to be resolved later
In simulation.ts, increase the value of players to simulate multi-player Memory Scramble games. By instrumenting your code, for example with console.log() statements or by keeping track of cards that different players flip over, you should observe correct control of cards, correct waiting when players try to flip over a first card, and correct removal of matching cards when players make a next move.

Notice that your simulation should not terminate if one player turns over matching cards in their last move (leaving two cards face up under that player’s control) and another player tries to flip one of them as their first card.

Consider revising your testing strategy to test different interleavings of concurrent player actions. You may find the timeout() function useful for forcing short waits. Very short timeouts (1 or even 0 milliseconds) give up control long enough for concurrent actions to run to completion. Avoid waiting for hundreds of milliseconds, because this may cause your tests to timeout on Didit. Do not put timeout() calls in your implementation code; this is a sign that your design has a race condition.

Review your commands.ts file to make sure it is using the asynchronous Board properly, according to the rules. Your commands should not busy-wait or hang. While one request is waiting (e.g. for a card to flip), other requests must be handled normally.
